You're talking about some of the obstacles that are in the way of getting a perfect... The unintended consequences and the things that people tend to overlook, even in a library like this, which is critically conscious of conservation and has been a supporter of conservation at its highest form, the most expensive form, for thirty years.
you know, without any questions.
They have, through Dr. Borstein, Mr. Mumford, and Dr. Burlington supported it, praised it.
We, you know, you're here, you know, you're not someplace else.
So anybody who they feel is important generally ends up coming here.
But at the same time, there is probably a confusion about what it is we do.
It's highly technical, sophisticated, craft-oriented stuff.
So they don't necessarily always understand the arguments we're making against some of the technology that they're pushing.
Yet it's a relatively happy marriage.
Now, the person who supervises scanning and stuff, that's somebody else I'm going to see, right?
That's the National Digital Library.
Are you going there?
Oh, yeah.
I'm very interested in that.
Well, we have connections with them because they have employed several positions here.
funded several positions for the purpose of us preparing materials for them to digitize.
And so there's been that recognition, but of course it's a recognition that indicates, one, the possibility of damage in the course of digitization.
I think the figures we looked at, and I'll certainly check them again, but I think we're talking at maybe 10,000 items a year, 4,000 of this and 6,000 or something else, that you're able to do here in this unit.
Is that about right?
Yes, that's accurate, and it varies.
You can do 10 books at 50 hours, but you can also do one book at 500 hours.
It's the same amount of time, but you've got one book and you've got 10 books.
So the numbers are difficult to correlate.
So I guess it's the number of hours, working hours.
How many hours have you got a year?
I would say that the figure, and I'm just talking off the top of my head right now, is that we have...
If we have twenty-five conservators... Let's do the math here.
Twenty-five times... Well, I'm talking about a year.
Seventeen hundred hours a year.
Let's say 40,000 hours.
So those are very precious hours, aren't they?
You really have to decide.
I mean, there really is a prioritization of material.
Do you ever get material that comes in?
Of course, you are dealing, I think you said at the beginning, fundamentally with what have been designated as rare books.
So you're really not, we mentioned 117 made-items, but as a practical matter, you're not dealing with the general collections.
So therefore, books that do come in here,
They've never passed that point of no return, have they?
Yeah, a book can be rare and still be in just abysmal shape.
Yeah, but I mean, but by the time it gets to you under the prioritization program, one would hope that you're catching it in time.
No, I wouldn't say that's true, because they haven't always been here, and, you know, you have a lot of inherent vice in books, which could mean that a book could be crucially rare,
but not used very much, I mean, is one part of it, and in terrible, terrible shape.
And if it doesn't happen to be something that the curator or the curators think is important, just because we have seven or eight million rare volumes, let's say, that's still a lot of books.
that's still a very, very narrow point at the top that you're working from.
So you can get rare books that are in terrible shape, absolutely terrible, especially with regard to the paper.
I mean, if it was a rare book, say, from 1865, because it's not always aged, you're into a situation where you have terrible paper.
I can show you one over here, too, that one of the interns is working on.
The paper is atrocious.
You're suggesting that because they're rare, they've generally been cared for better.
No, no, no.
I guess I'm interested in a larger... When I was at Cornell, they have this policy there that they call phase deterioration, and it really doesn't have anything to do with the rare books.
But they've made a decision that this book is not going to fit into any preservation scheme.
And so what they're going to do is, I guess, make it comfortable.
Like a hospice.
Yeah, that's exactly right.
And they also say that if you pass at a certain point, and the reason this decision is made, apparently you pass at a certain point where it's impossible to enter, to intervene, and to reverse the deacidification process.
Every book can be saved at some point.
You may have to adjust the format.
In other words, if you get paper which is down to zero-fold, it would be very difficult for you to rebind it.
You know, any time anybody turned the page, it would come apart, even if you deacidified it.
But you could encapsulate it in mylar and put it in a bound post-binding format so it could be still dealt with.
Now, you're changing the format, you're putting something to intervene between the book leaf and your fingers,
And you might ask, well, really, you know, why not just copy it?
But we do that with some things.
Some things are too brittle, but you want to retain them in the format that a book provides, as opposed to this scrolling format.
Well, at Cornell, some of the books that they do digitize, they proceed to make hard copy copies and bind them.
And they're doing this.
When I was up there last year, they had already done about 5,500 books.
Right.
And as a practical matter also, they are, you know, they're largely 19th-century books.
They have copyright problems, you know, so they have to be public domain books.
Also in that period where the pulp and the acids, you know, it's a lousy paper.
But when I went up there, I mean, these books, the spines are off, they've been guillotined, they've been stripped, so you can get a true copy.
And then when they're done with that book, it goes to the landfill.
and then they may make a hard copy.
I mean, Cornell is very prominent in this whole thing and there are people who are fast behind it and a lot of other people who say it's vandalism.
Where do you stand in that?
I would be inclined to think they ought to go slow.
I think it's very easy to make mistakes.
I think it's very easy to get
whipped up by the notion that you know slow fire is created the movie that the cultural heritage of the united states and the world is slowly disintegrating i think that's a fictitious um um agenda it's not there's a certain truth to it in i think in a much smaller portion and i think that there is this is like a job um creating environment to my mind it's it's it's again mass technology
And I think that nobody considers the sidebars, which is that you've destroyed the book.
And they're going to say, well, it's practically destroyed anyway.
But there are going to be books that are not practically destroyed that are going to be destroyed.
And it's the thin end of the wedge.
Listen, I saw things up there that they were scanning, and they weren't necessarily books, but they were Harper's weeklies and monthlies.
And we called one up on the screen, and I said, gee, that's a...
I have no Winslow Homer.
I said, that's a Winslow Homer wood engraving.
I said, where's the original for this?
I said, go on.
I said, you know, you realize you sent a Homer engraving up to the landfill.
This is a valuable piece of art.
You could have sold it, perhaps, you know.
They could have, but you see.
Well, I mean, that's, I mean, you.
But they don't want to get into that.
They really don't want people to know.
You know, like in San Francisco, I was up there last week.
Do you have a card right away, Tom?
This is a 13th century Cistercian gradual.
Unfortunately, I'm not going to open it up.
It's just been bound, and so it has to really drive.
Pardon me?
Is that a vellum?
No, this is Allum Todd Caskin.
Wow, that's beautiful, isn't it?
It is, and it's very, very durable.
It's the same process that they make baseballs from, which is always interesting to people.
But the leaves are on vellum, and it's a very pretty book, and it's got wooden boards.
And how old is that book?
13th century.
We'll have these clasps, which the binder made will go on it to hold the boards shut.
And that's contemporary?
Uh, it's a contemporary design.
Oh, you made that?
Yeah.
Oh, okay.
And what happened to the previous binding?
This was in a nineteenth-century binding of absolutely no merit.
You'll see some older books over here that are in the original bindings.
Adams, et al.
Oh, it's in the press?
Nothing here?
Well, we'll have to take our word for it.
I do, I do.
Okay.
Can't see everything.
And we've got some Wright Brothers material here that are being mended and then rehoused.
A series of notebooks and diaries that they kept from 50 fellows that they were.
Notebooks usually from banks and drug stores that they got for free.
Kareen is doing some boxing.
These are books from Inconabula.
In this case, Alan taught pigskin, but it's the same material.
It's 500 years old.
And that does look like a 500-year-old body.
Yes, it does.
This is... Genealogy Boccaccio.
This is from the Fine Printing Collection, so I'm not quite sure who the printer is here.
Pretty nice shape, though, huh?
Yeah, well, I mean, this is quality paper, and this kind of structure, this alum-taught pigskin,
How do you spell that, Alum?
Alum, A-L-U-M, hyphen, T-A-W-E-D.
I'm working on a book from the Photographs Division of Rembrandt Action Restrikes.
Have you got one there?
Yes.
Maybe you could just explain, what is a Lembrandt re-strike?
This is a print, an engraving.
His plates were done at a later time.
It was collected by a collector.
Beautiful.
And the collector had an entire collection.
I remember it was probably printed.
And the album is his collection.
Do you remember the name of the collector?
I don't remember it.
It wasn't wrestling out there.
It wasn't wrestling.
I've got it.
That's okay.
And you're doing what again?
You're just... Well, it's being rebound and I'm sewing it.
I'm sewing it.
I cast guard the ages of three and then it's going into a new binding.
The original binding was just here.
And how long has this particular item been in the collection, would you say?
I think it's been here
So it's taken us 40 years to get around to doing what you're doing.
Yeah.
But you haven't had to do anything with these prints?
No, the plates have not had that many.
They've been for so little cleaning.
There were some poor quality face sheets that were removed and they were all crinkled and so on.
How many plates were there?
They're 49.
Do you enjoy them while they're doing this?
Well, you left them out because we generally give them away to visitors.
You have one, right?
Yeah, well, I guess we give them all away.
Just watch them and let me out of the building.
That's too bad.
Thank you.
That's great.
Having finished a book here and is now shaping the spine.
That will sit in the press overnight.
That's a press conference.
That's a lying press, and it's between back and forth, and that's what takes the rounded shape that you see with the book and gives it the shoulders in which the boards sit.
What do we call this room again that we're in?
This is the Rare Book Conservation Center.
Well, you have a lying press.
These are nipping presses, the larger presses that you see sitting in.
And the nipping press does what?
What you see right there, you see a book that's sitting in the press with brass rods in the joint for the purpose of accentuating that groove that you often see in the book.
This is a vellum book, and vellum, being as hygroscopic as it is, needs to sit under pressure.
What was the word?
Hygroscopic, attractive to moisture.
Okay.
This is also used for box making.
When you make a box like this, you would secure this tray to this case by putting it in the press and putting wooden blocks in it and pressing it down.
This is the book she mentioned that was in the press.
Now, she's sewn it.
This is the Commissioner's Accounts of New York, the money that the American emissaries to France during the Revolutionary War spent
on the cost of sort of getting your French to help them out.
And that is, again, sitting in one of those lying... In a lying press.
L-Y-I-N-D, lying press.
This is an original cover to a book that John's working on, and he's in the process of taking out some of the techniques for making it reusable.
This is a process which is a little bit unusual,
often found in Germany, called Medusa, which is to say you have allotard material that's been colored and partially tanned with the use of Hermes or Cochineal, and that's what gives it the colored mask.
What's your phone number here, if they have any follow-ups?
I'll give you a follow-up.
And Judith is working on, again, taking ovular materials, and you see, this is a nice little shot here.
of missing words, and where do they go?
And so she's got them next to her, a little Nina Simone, and that's all you need, really.
And so are you the one who's putting the puzzle together?
Are you pretty sure before you... Is there a copy to work from, or...?
logic is common sense here.
We're not going to probably be able to find where all of them go.
They would be encapsulated and included through the book.
What we're looking at are really almost little fragments, little pieces of paper from a
This suffered water damage, and consequently to that, mold damage, and the paper softens and falls apart.
And so how long ago do you think that might have happened?
Was this just something recently discovered or something that recently happened?
No, this would have happened sometime ago, possibly in its previous ownership.
It's unlikely to have happened here.
But this is 500 years old.
It's a long and interesting history.
Yeah.
Great.
Thanks.
Good.
Do you want to get a look at any place else?
No, I think.
So we're talking to Kenneth Harris, Preservation Projects Director.
Anyway, that's what it is.
We're talking to Kenneth Harris, the Preservation Projects Director.
So I guess I'm kind of interested in what you do and the policies that govern it, and maybe we can just start in a very general manner like that.
interested in mass deacetification specifically.
I mean, it's a technology that the library's been working on development of since the mid-seventies.
Chemists at the Library of Congress developed and patented a mass deacetification process called the diethyl zinc or D-E-Z process.
worked on the development and perfection of that process for about twenty years, I guess, altogether.
And after that process had been under development for a few years, a number of other processes began to emerge in the United States and in other countries, as you know.
So, the library also got involved in evaluating and testing other processes.
In the United States, this included the Wayto process,
What did you call it, sir?
W-E-I-T-O.
That's another American developed process.
It's been used at the National Archives and National Library of Canada for about, I think, 17 years.
It's a liquid phase process, what we call a liquid phase process.
These deacertification processes break down roughly into gas processes, a gas approach to deacertification, using a gas to formulate the book, or using a liquid approach to neutralizing the acids in the books.
So the process that you've heard of, for example, in Germany, is a liquid phase process.
It's a derivative of this weight-toe process that was developed in the United States in the early 70s.
So the libraries
The DES process that I indicated our chemists developed in the seventies is a gas process.
It was fully developed and perfected, but the chemical company that was working with the library got out of the business about three years ago.
So that was the end of that process?
That was the end of that process.
It's not currently being commercialized.
Was it good?
Was it a good process?
It's a very good process, yes, very effective.
The two major disadvantages are safety factors.
The chemical is pyrophoric.
I'll start with the word once again.
Pyrophoric, P-Y-R-O, phoric.
It means you have to exercise real explicit safety precautions in handling and converting the chemical.
It can blow up in the presence of oxygen or water.
Chemistry.
And did it in fact do that once?
Well, it did it once in a test chamber at NASA back seventeen years ago in 1985, December of 85 and February of 86.
And was it in conjunction with a test for, specifically for this kind of thing?
For deacidification for the library.
There was a company called Northrop.
Did they make airplane?
Northrop Industries.
It was under contract to NASA, and the library was working through NASA.
with this company in Northrop, and they were doing some testing, and some—I wasn't around, so I don't have first-hand knowledge of this, but what I've read of it is that some diethylzinc, some of this chemistry was still in a test chamber.
They weren't using the real library books at all.
In fact, at that point, that test chamber was empty.
They're still trying to figure out how to develop the process.
They were.
It was very much in the early developmental stage when they weren't even dreaming of doing anything with real books.
Evidently, the gauges did not indicate to the engineers present that there was still some dizz in the bottom of the cylinder, and some water was introduced, and it caused a flash fire inside the cylinder.
But no one was hurt.
No books were damaged.
There weren't any books anywhere near it.
There was a second event in February of 86, the following year, and after that, I think NASA and or Northrop decided they didn't want anything else to do with it.
Well, they basically—you hear rumors that the library had about a test chamber that blew up or something.
That's not the case at all.
But they certainly must have been prized for reflection.
It was.
It was, I'm sure.
Well, then the library sought out the assistance of a professional chemical company that had sophisticated experience in dealing with the chemistry itself.
And that's when the library went to Texas Alkyls, a large commercial chemistry company in Texas.
Texas?
In Texas, called Texas Alkyls, A-L-K-Y.
A-O-K-Y-L-S.
Okay.
It was bought up and eventually became AXO, A-K-Z-O.
And these are the people you're working with?
Chemical.
No, it was a company we worked with until 1994 when they got out of the business.
Oh, they're the people who discontinued this process.
That's right.
So they worked with the library for several years, developed a test facility in Texas, did a number of test runs for the library, basically perfected the process, but then they reached the conclusion that
But they weren't going to get a large enough business from the library and archival community nationwide to make a good business venture for them.
But they said that they basically had made this public announcement that they were leaving the business because it wasn't going to be profitable enough.
And nobody else could pick up on it.
No one else could pick up on it.
So the one big comparison that's frequently made between DES and some other processes is that the DES process was, you might say, capitalization-intensive.
The physical plant is fairly expensive.
More expensive than for other processes.
What were the advantages of it?
One of the advantages is that since it's a gas phase process, it permeates all kinds of the papers more deferentially, I mean, without discrimination, and more thoroughly.
every variety of book paper that you can imagine than other processes that we've tested and evaluated.
Some other processes are very good, but they don't penetrate a variety of papers.
I'm talking about coated paper stock, wood ground paper, supercalendar paper, every kind of paper that you can imagine a book being printed on, including coated book stock, kind of art books.
And did you have to open them, or did you just kind of put the books?
Well, in fact, they were put in the chamber closed.
In fact, you could put several hundred of the books in one facility, one test chamber at a time.
Several hundred.
This wasn't done here.
It was done in Texas.
So you'd have to send the books to Texas?
That's right.
Or ship them by train or whatever?
By truck.
And how many were you doing?
We were only doing tests.
We were never treating real laboratory books.
For some other libraries it was in the last year that we were perfecting the process with Exo Chemical Company, solving the last two remaining problems that we knew of with the process.
Some other libraries were actually treating real library materials.
Harvard-wise, really?
Harvard, Johns Hopkins.
Northwestern did some tests.
I don't know if they were treating—I don't think Northwestern was actually treating library books, but I think Harvard and Johns Hopkins were probably their primary customers.
Sally Sleuth?
Pittsburgh?
I don't think so.
Pittsburgh State?
They had other customers.
I know they had other customers, but I'm not sure right now who they were.
Two of the larger customers were Harvard and John Thomas.
Was this exciting?
Were you very optimistic that this was— It was very exciting, and it was exciting, especially when Dr. Shahani, our head research chemist here, basically worked with the engineers of this company and solved problems.
One of the ongoing problems with that process through the years was that it imbibed an odor, post-treatment odor, into books, which wasn't very desirable.
But, I mean, that's the last problem that was solved.
I mean, they figured out how to get it out of books.
So that problem was solved before Axel got out of the business.
So there are, for example, interests in other countries, like in the Netherlands right now, who are thinking about commercializing the DES process.
So it may, in fact, get commercialized someplace else earlier than it does New York City.
I haven't seen it in the Netherlands in a couple of weeks.
It's a Dutch company.
interestingly, to start with.
But the Dutch National Archives and Library have both been very interested in the test process.
In spite of that, I think they're both working very actively right now with a Dutch company, a Dutch purveyor of preservation supplies and services, a company called Archie Mascon.
It's a Dutch company.
I think that's A-R-C-H-I.
A-R-C-H-I.
Hyphen M-A-S-C-O-N.
I may have that wrong, but I think it's correct.
If you ask the people at the Dutch, at the Royal Dutch Archives, who are also working with the library, they're physically joined to one of those two buildings.
You'll see when you go there and visit that the archives are really kind of providing leadership here.
for both of those institutions.
And as I understand it, they're working with that Dutch company.
And that Dutch company is working with the company of Pittsburgh that we're currently using to actually deacidify real library books for the first time.
And who is that?
It's a company called PTI, Preservation Technologies, Incorporated.
I'll give you some information here.
There's an article here that appears in the library's information bulletin in April.
And there's a short and probably to you useful article here about that.
The library uses that process and also mentions what we did with DES in the past.
I can have that?
Some other things, yes.
And I think also perhaps in one of the last paragraphs here it mentions some of the things that are being looked into in other countries.
It mentions several of the other countries where deacidification is being developed or looked into.
This will mention that
PTI Company and their process, which is called Bookkeeper.
These are pictures of Bookkeeper equipment.
There's two kinds of treatment cylinders.
This one and a horizontal one.
There's some pictures there.
This Dutch company, as I understand it, is working with PTI Company in Pittsburgh to get them to build both of these kinds of equipment on a test basis for use by these Dutch institutions.
And then this Dutch company is going to sell services to these major cultural institutions in the Netherlands.
And I suppose if they're successful, they'll probably sell it to services to other institutions in Europe.
So that's just in the developmental stage right now.
I understand they have a contract with the company in Pittsburgh to build them equipment.
And what's the essence of this particular thing?
Okay, this and the German process that you'll see in Leipzig, and the Waito process in Canada.
processes being developed at the Bibliothèque Nationale de France, which you'll see in Sable if you go there.
They're all liquid processes.
So, compared to the process developed at the library some years ago, which was a gas process, these are all liquid processes.
Okay?
So, basically, three kinds of deacertification processes.
The gas process diffuses a chemical like calcium.
In this case, our gas process uses zinc.
It's actually the chemical zinc neutralizes the acid in books with the DES process.
Most of these liquid phase processes use calcium or magnesium.
One of the processes, a new German process, uses both calcium and magnesium.
So those three chemicals, zinc, magnesium, and calcium are the basic three neutralizing agents that are used to neutralize the acid in books with all these processes.
diffuses, I mean DES diffuses zinc into books.
These liquid processes imbibe calcium or magnesium deposits into the paper to neutralize the acids.
Now, what's different about bookkeeper?
Okay, you can picture this on the one hand.
There's DES, which is gaseous.
All the other processes except bookkeeper, which you could call liquid phase.
What I mean by that is that a chemical, magnesium oxide or calcium oxide,
a chemical is dissolved in a liquid carrier, in another chemical.
And that dissolved chemical that's floating in another chemical permeates the bookkeeper.
That's easy to understand because you know how things dissolve, how sugar dissolves in water.
The thing that's different about the bookkeeper process is that it's not a liquid phase process.
It's a liquid process.
It's a process of kind of physical entrainment.
magnesium oxide actually floats in the carrier.
It's not dissolved in it.
It's a suspension?
So it's a suspension or a dispersion.
I suppose either term is probably technically accurate.
It's a process that has magnesium oxide particles in dispersion or suspension in the liquid.
There are three books there.
Is that basically how many you do at a time?
There's only three.
They only do three or four in this what they call Bookkeeper II equipment.
You'll see this identified here.
Most books that they've been treating for the Library of Congress, under current contract they're treating eighty-eight thousand books for us, are treated in this kind of cylinder, which is a vertical cylinder.
I think there's probably like a diagram here.
There's two racks in each vertical cylinder, and each rack, top and the bottom, holds four books.
So each one of these cylinders holds eight books at a time.
Is it going to be four cylinders?
Two thirty-two books approximately.
It's not exactly simultaneous, but that's the way it works.
But it costs ten thousand either.
No.
Well, you have to do the, interestingly enough, you jump to the same conclusion I do, and everyone does.
You think, well, you know, you have a test chamber in Texas where you could do 40,000 books in a year, and you put 300 or 400 books in there at a time, that's got to be more efficient.
And in fact, all the processes are different.
You take a DES process, it could be upscaled so that you could treat several thousand books at a time.
But what we were doing before we were doing, we was, in Texas, we were capable of treating 40,000 books in a year.
One cycle with that process took about four days.
So before you could open a cylinder, I'd take the three or four hundred books out.
Four days had passed.
With some of these liquid processes, like this, you put books in, you can actually take them out completely dried, and then you can put back on the shelf in two hours.
So even though there's only eight books in this cylinder, this company is running these four cylinders around the clock on three shifts, as I understand it.
capable of treating, just with those four little cylinders, over 100,000 books a year.
Wow.
In other words, though it's more labor-intensive, the cycle time is so much less, even though the labor is more intensive, they're capable of treating more books on that small scale than the sun.
Is the Leipzig thing similar to this?
I've got pictures of it I can show you.
I'm sure you'll see it in Germany, too.
They have two fairly small cylinders that hold a few books at a time, but they're round cylinders too, but they're mounted this way.
They're lying down on the side.
And it kind of goes through assembly line fashion?
Yeah, so to speak.
Do you have to open the book?
Do you have to, you know, flare the cages or something?
I don't think so with the Battelle process.
I think they put them in baskets.
I think that they're not opened or flared as much.
With this process, since this process imbibes chemical,
more onto the surface, and it doesn't soak in as readily as it does into the interstices of the book page as quickly as it does with the other liquid phase processes.
Processes like this and one other process I know of depend on fanning the pages of the book open.
Fanning?
Well, and they do that, for example, with this process.
They have nozzles around these cylinders.
This may be described in this article, I'm not sure.
And does an individual have to do that?
No.
No, there's actually nozzles on the exterior of each of these cylinders, and the books rotate very slowly, very slowly past these nozzles, and these nozzles present some turbulence, a little bit of turbulence in the liquid, and it helps span the pages of the books open.
The cylinder is completely closed, so the chemistry won't evaporate.
So it's kind of a hands-off process.
Once the books are mounted and lowered,
into each of the cylinders a completely airtight lid is put on top of it.
Is it kind of like dry cleaning where you try to recycle?
It is, in fact.
It's a good parallel.
They recycle—I understand.
They say that they recycle about 95 percent of their chemistry.
The chemistry is very expensive, so they want to recycle it.
They recycle it and completely filter it, so it filters out any
particulates or degradation products that it takes out of the books.
Well, it's an interesting parallel.
I know we used to have to recycle the perchloethylene.
Well, that's interesting.
This is a relative.
I mean, the main chemical they're using here is perfluoroalkane, and then it looks white or milky like this just because it has magnesium particles floating in it.
And some people compare a process like this to dry cleaning the books because, in fact, we get books back.
They're actually a little bit brighter.
Sometimes they actually look, some people actually joke and they say it looks like the books have been dry cleaned.
It gets rid of odors.
So this comes to, one of the virtues of this bookkeeper process is that it essentially does sort of dry clean the books.
It takes out particulars.
Everything's fine.
This is the end of part one of the Kenneth E. Harris interview at the Library of Congress on September 18, 1997.
The batteries went dead at this particular point and the interview picks up on side two of
The LC Tape 1.
It's slugged LC 1 and this is LC 2.
So the Harris Tape continues on LC 1 side 2.